* The Framers hoped that the Constitution would follow [[3.4 Philosophical Foundations of the American Revolution#Government|Enlightenment]] ideals while fixing the weaknesses of the Articles
* Power was divided by the Constitution vertically (federal and state) and horizontally (three branches of gov't)
* Congress was also to [[3.8 The Constitutional Convention and Debates Over Ratification#Ratification|implement a bill of rights to appease NC and NY]]
## Federalism
* The Framers divided power between the federal and state gov'ts
	* The federal government would handle national matters e.g. defense, foreign affairs, and national commerce
	* States would handle issues such as education and state elections
* As time went on, the federal government has become increasingly powerful through constitutional amendments

## Separation of Powers
* Power was divided between three branches of government
	* Legislative (Congress) - laws, taxes, spending
	* Executive (Presidency) - carries out/recommends laws and federal programs
	* Judicial (Federal courts) - interprets laws and Constitution
- The Constitution has ways for a branch of government to be limited by the others
	- Leg. can pass laws, Exe. can veto, Jud. can deem unconstitutional
	- Exe. can make treaties, Leg. must ratify
	- Exe. can enforce laws, Jud. can stop if unconstitutional
	- Jud. interprets laws, Congress can write new laws
	- Jud. can make the Exe. enforce laws, Exe. can appoint new justices
## Bill of Rights

* In 1789, Congress approved ten amendments to defend individual liberty known as the Bill of Rights
	* Ratified in a [[3.8 The Constitutional Convention and Debates Over Ratification#Ratification|deal w/ NC and NY]]
	* Drafted by Madison
* Protected against abuses by the federal government
	* Extended to protection against state gov'ts with the 14th Amendment in 1868
### Amendments

1. Congress shall make no law infringing on freedom of religion, speech, press, assembly, or petition
2. Congress may not infringe the citizens' right to bear arms
3. No soldier shall be quartered in a private house without consent of the owner (see [[3.3 Taxation Without Representation#Coercive/Intolerable Acts|Quartering Acts]])
4. Protects people against unreasonable search/seizure
5. Protects people from being forced to incriminate themselves by weighing in on a crime ("pleading the Fifth")
6. Someone accused of a crime has the right to a quick and public trial with an impartial jury, and to be informed of the accusation
7. In suits of common law, citizens have the right to a jury trial
8. Protects against excessive bail, excessive fines, and cruel/unusual punishment
9. Rights to travel, vote, keep private personal matters, etc. (unspecified in the Bill of Rights, interpreted by the SCOTUS)
10. Powers not given to the federal gov't or held from the states are reserved to the states or to the people